Submission of Botan / Cryptography Community Project: Leg 1 Proposal (#57)
haskellfoundation/tech-proposals: proposals/052-cryptography-leg-1.md

# Background

Cryptography is an essential part of modern computing and information security, but it requires care, nuance, and knowledge to properly implement, and is extremely easy to mess up. It covers a diverse range of functions, with individual algorithms often having their own particular quirks that must be acknowledged to properly and safely use. Failure to properly implement cryptography carries the risk of severely compromising the security of any system in which it is used. Manually implementing common cryptographic primitives such as hashes, ciphers, digital signatures, big-integer arithmetic is thus considered extremely unwise, both in terms of security and performance.

> Cryptography is even harder for functional programming languages. Properly implementing techniques such as sanitizing memory, performing operations in constant time, are already difficult enough in languages such as C, and in a lazy functional language it is made even more difficult by such things as the potential for references to be kept alive within thunks. As a result, the space of functional cryptography is relatively under-explored and under-developed, having favored other languages where such things are easier to manage.

Author: Sorry, That is just colloquialism / lax terminology. I am not sure whether thunk vs closure matters - the concern is that secure data may be captured, whether itself as part of a closure, or because its cleanup was be deferred in a thunk and not forced, and either way it can result in sensitive data staying in memory for longer than intended.

Lazy evaluation presents a challenge towards managing and clearing sensitive data\* from memory, as care must be taken in order to force finalizers / cleanup appropriately. This is in addition to the challenges that strict languages already face (eg, ejecting from caches / registers).

> \* keys, secure texts, personally identifiable information

I should probably also emphasize that this effect pertains to **lazy evaluation**, not *functional languages in general*.

> However, if we accept this downside as a part of a trade-off, and explore the ways that functional programming is beneficial to cryptography (monads, type systems, referential transparency), there is then also the potential for functional cryptography to be made *easier*. The functional machinery of Haskell is well-suited for adding important contextual control to cryptography, and can help prevent or eliminate many issues and errors in ways that languages such as C cannot. I believe that there is room for significant improvement, given a directed effort to develop the space.

Author: That is a good idea.

I am colloquially referring to the collective properties and design advantage of functional purity, type systems, and monadic interfaces, and how these provide a stricter (as in law, not as in evaluation) context to write functions in than the free-for-all that many imperative / OOP languages can offer. As a high-level example, we could separate off / restrict cryptographic operations into their own monad, in order to securely store and access sensitive values without allowing them to escape, not unlike how ST hides IO to safely provide locally mutable references.

I'll rework this a bit.

# Problem Statement

> Cryptography in Haskell lacks significant capability beyond basic primitives. This places a significant burden on developers to properly implement various security techniques, and exposes end users to significant risk in the event of a lapse in security. Some companies have built their own solution to this, but there is no community-driven, community-owned solution.

Author: There is nothing wrong with a company building it per se\*, rather the issue is of ownership of the resulting ecosystem, and the resulting incentive misalignment:

1) cryptography and security are a preventative measure and a cost center for most companies
2) companies for which cryptography / security are a product have a strong incentive to marshal users into a walled garden at first in the name of security, but then later in the name of profit
3) Developing an ecosystem is a significant up-front investment, and so investors may expect ownership of the ecosystem in order to recoup their cost
4) There is an incentive to wait for someone else to develop an open ecosystem, instead of expending resources yourself to do it

As such, for-profit approaches are incentivized to either invest in a private ecosystem, or invest in an established open ecosystem, but are perversely incentivized against building a new open ecosystem.

For reference, technically *I* am a company here, as I have my own LLC set up in order to protect my intellectual property, due to a previous employer having built a product based on it behind my back while acting interested in investing in my work - it was a harsh lesson.

Not all companies are like that, but the profit incentive is exceedingly strong, and so care must be taken to outline the ownership of the resulting ecosystem, in order to engender trust. I should make some revisions here to better elucidate this.

> Cryptography in Haskell is also fragile and outdated, having seen considerable flux / churn over the years as various libraries have been developed and then deprecated or abandoned in favor of newer ones. This has placed the long-term stability of important libraries such as `tls` and `x509` at risk of falling behind as compilers are upgraded, old standards are updated, and new standards are implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Haskell cryptographic libraries are also presently fragile and outdated, having seen considerable flux / churn over the years as various libraries have been developed and then deprecated or abandoned in favor of newer ones. This has placed the long-term stability of important libraries such as `tls` and `x509` at risk of falling behind as compilers are upgraded, old standards are updated, and new standards are implemented.
```
What does "fragile" mean here? I'd expect it to mean that the library doesn't work well (e.g. segfaults when given slightly bogus input), but it sounds to me like you're instead talking about the development process for the libraries.

Author: That is accurate. I have two factors in mind when I say 'fragile':

1) Difficulty in ensuring adoption of new libraries when old ones are deprecated - the cryptography ecosystem in haskell suffers from this extensively as the organization of modules and libraries has changed over time while code has moved from `cryptohash / cryptocipher` to `crypton` and `cryptonite`. As a result, there are multiple cryptography libraries with almost the same interface, because of a shared lineage, and it is not always clear which should be used preferentially. This promotes rot as dependents of unmaintained libraries finally stop working.

2) These libraries have highly concrete implementations / bad abstractions / interfaces which are strongly influenced by their implementation, but have propagated due to shared lineage. While the interfaces themselves haven't really changed much, the same code has been moved from library to library, in part because it violates the abstraction barrier such that if we change backends, it could require breaking the interface - which makes the logic itself brittle. Yet, there is still so much built on it, which also must change in order to move forward.

There are several reasons for this:

> 1) Cryptography involves a lot of stateful low-level bit twiddling and random IO, something Haskell is not known for being good at. Classes like `Bits` and `FiniteBits` classes are critical for cryptography, but are terribly awkward to implement (like `Num`). Also, `ByteString` does not implement them for nuanced reasons.

Reviewer: This is random IO in the sense of "random access to mutable arrays" rather than "IO happens sometimes", right?

A link to the ByteString issue here would be convenient.

Author: I should rephrase this as cryptographic non-determinism rather than 'random IO', and differentiate it from 'worldly' non-determinism, which is your more traditional IO. This is probably way more of an answer than you expected, but there is also a very fine distinction between entropy and pseudorandom generators, and existing Haskell libraries do not do a very good job of separating it all out, especially when we use pseudorandom generators as a substitute for entropy sources.

Ideally, non-deterministic values should just be exposed as an input, and the resulting function would be pure and deterministic. However, nonce mismanagement has caused *many* security lapses, and so many functions / protocols / libraries remove user randomness / nonce handling in favor of hiding it as an implementation detail, either taking a random generator state as an argument, or even hiding it as an internal global / IO reference, which makes the resulting function non-deterministic / impure. A good example of this is `bcrypt`, which takes a random generator context as an argument.

Properly representing the difference between determinism, ideal entropy, and pseudorandom generators requires differentiating functions of the following forms, even though they are all related:

```haskell
deterministicFoo :: Int -> a -> b
randomFoo :: (Random m) => a -> m b
pseudoRandomFoo :: Pseudorandom g => g -> a -> (g, b)
impureFoo :: a -> IO b
```

Note that these are not the same when it comes to cryptography and entropy. `deterministicFoo` represents a single sampling event, `randomFoo` represents an event that hasn't been sampled yet and will be different every time you do, and `pseudoRandomFoo` represents an event that has been sampled so its predetermined but you don't know the result yet. You can simulate Random with a secret state a la `(State g, Pseudorandom g) => ...` but there is a lawful difference between them.

For reference, the Botan FFI RNG objects are closer to entropy sources (although they internally use PRNG with automatic reseeding from system entropy sources).

---

Regarding `Bits` and `FiniteBits`, this is worth getting into and I made a very rough sketch of a `Boolean` class that may have spawned a conversation or two [in the devlog](https://discourse.haskell.org/t/botan-bindings-devlog/6855/78) and [in a side thread](https://discourse.haskell.org/t/why-doesnt-uuid-have-a-bits-instance/7629). Essentially, `Bits` (and the fixed-width `FiniteBits`) is a class that combines two concepts:

1) Boolean / Heyting algebra, for which there is no concept of any 'internal bits' or structure and you are just operating on some object as a whole
2) Things that are contructed from / encoded into a set of 'internal bits' using some encoding, for which individual bits are indexable / addressible, and thus individually boolean-operable. There is also a link here to indexing / representable, but that is getting way out of scope.

Notably, [the documentation itself](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.17.0.0/docs/Data-Bits.html) further states that "The Bits class defines bitwise operations over integral types.". Technically this means that only things that are integer numbers should be `Bits` and `FiniteBits`, but Godel numbering rears its ugly head, and that just adds the question of whether `Bits`'s boolean operations are intended to apply to an object or its encoding, and as a result `Bits` and `FiniteBits` restricts it to objects for which the boolean operations are isomorphic to boolean operations over its encoding.

Given this understanding, `ByteString` does not have a canonical `Bits` instance because it has no canonical integer representation - a given bytestring could represent many such integers, whether it be big endian or little endian, it could have a sign bit, or be two's complement. Its bits might not be contiguous or even ordered. It could easily satisfy a `Boolean` instance, but the issue of indexing individual bits and integral type requirement interferes with a full instance of `Bits`.

> As if that wasn't confusing enough, we could go further and involve [finite](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_field) [fields](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_(mathematics)) and [bit-field](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit_field) and how bit-fields are fields of bits but not all fields of bits are bit-fields. Whether or not we should tie `Bits` and `FiniteBits` to `Field` and `FiniteField` is a whole extra conversation.

2) Cryptography has a high knowledge and technical skill floor. Cryptography is more than just the usual primitives of ciphers, public and private keys, hashes, and MACs, and the scope of knowledge can grow quickly as primitives are combined into more advanced algorithms.

> 3) The notion that functional programming is "bad at cryptography" (ie, underperformant and has insurmountable challenges) is a self-fulfilling prophecy, and will remain so unless we invest in enough effort to disprove it.

Reviewer: It sounded to me in the introduction like you were saying there were fundamental reasons why Haskell was a poor choice to implement e.g. Salsa20, but here you're saying that it's more incidental and due to lack of trying. I think the proposal should be consistent on this point.

Author: I think it would be accurate to say that there are historical reasons that have been mostly since addressed; while one might choose another language if eking out every CPU cycle is your priority, well-written modern Haskell approaches C in terms of speed, and has a much higher ergonomic-use and type-safety factor. However, the public image has not caught up yet and so the ecosystem has not received the investment and attention necessary to attract the attention of cryptography developers.

4) A fair lot of cryptographic projects in recent years has been specifically towards *cryptocurrencies*, rather than *cryptography in general*, and their results are at large fairly useless if they cannot be used outside of their ecosystems.

> All of these reasons have contributed to the stagnant state of Haskell cryptography, and have make it an unfavorable environment for developers of cryptosystems and distributed systems. However, none of these are actual blockers, and each of these things can be corrected with effort. There is much that can be done to improve the Haskell cryptography ecosystem, ranging from better low-level support, to higher-level abstractions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of these reasons have contributed to the stagnant state of Haskell cryptography, and have make it an unfavorable environment for application developers, especially developers of cryptosystems and distributed systems. However, none of these are actual blockers, and each of these things can be corrected with effort. There is much that can be done to improve the Haskell cryptography ecosystem, ranging from better low-level support, to higher-level abstractions:
```

- Up-to-date algorithms
- Hierarchy of typeclasses
- Monadic interfaces
- Safety abstractions

> - Type-level composition

Reviewer: How is type-level composition something that's useful for cryptography? Similarly, why is a monadic interface better than, say, an Applicative one or just a pure function? My mental model of the semantics of a typical cipher is that they take a plaintext, a key, and a nonce, and then spit out a ciphertext - this is a pure function! Why is a monad useful here?

Similarly, I'd typically consider a hierarchy of type classes to be a bad thing, unless it's needed to solve a particular problem. It's nicer to have simpler APIs, isn't it?

Author: I'll be eliding some of this (type-level stuff) from the proposal, and Ill clear this up a bit. It is relevant for more abstract stuff down the line, but after a bunch of comments about the more abstract libraries, I decided it was distracting / out of scope of this proposal. Type-level stuff will be useful later for composing cryptographic primitives  but for wrapping Botan it is unnecessary.

Regarding monadic interfaces:

> Similarly, why is a monadic interface better

I sort of envision a `Crypto` monad that ensures strict IO, deep evaluation, memory safety, and prompt cleanup - a sort of cryptographically-oriented ST or STM, and its hard to see that working with just Applicative. A pure implementation should be used as the foundation if at all possible, but manually passing around random generators or outputs is a big potential error surface, and monads as a design pattern help minimize that.

> It's nicer to have simpler APIs, isn't it?

Absolutely, but not every library exposes pure APIs for their cryptographic operations. Even in Botan, there is some dissonance regarding this. The intent here isn't for us to force users to use a specific (abstract) interface, it is to have one already implemented for users when they come across an implementation that itself forces users to use a specific interface. I refer back to:

```haskell
deterministicFoo :: Int -> a -> b
randomFoo :: (Random m) => a -> m b
pseudoRandomFoo :: Pseudorandom g => g -> a -> (g, b)
impureFoo :: a -> IO b
```

Sometimes `deterministicFoo` is not exported / exposed / available - we might only get access to one of these functions, which leaves us unable to implement some or all of the others.

Admittedly there is a bit of tension between 'ideal' cryptography, the actual implementations available to us, and our need to perform cryptography safely.

> - Advanced data structure (eg, merkle trees)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Advanced data structures (eg, Merkle trees)
```

- Use of Generic for crypto-serialization

As a result, there is much to be gained from investing in foundational Haskell cryptography. Haskell is well-suited to providing many aspects of information security through use of monadic interfaces and the type system, if the lower-level challenges of strictness and performant primitives can be solved. The community needs a cryptography library that is easily maintained, with minimal dependencies / baggage, and with documentation, tutorials, and unit tests to ease development.

> A first step would be developing bindings to a suitably-licensed open-source C or C++ library containing modern and up-to-date cryptography algorithms, including post-quantum cryptography schemes.

Reviewer: While  I quibble with your steps, I think the conclusion is correct. Here's what I think is a more convincing argument:
1. Resistance to side channel attacks requires very low-level control over an implementation, but part of the point of Haskell is getting away from micromanaging the computer.
2. Trustworthy crypto libraries are extremely expensive to develop, but bindings are much cheaper
3. Haskell's C FFI can connect well to C implementations
4. The crypto community knows C, they don't know Haskell, so there's more resources to get the nonfunctional requirements right over there, and mature libraries exist.

Author: This is a much more succinct way of expressing some of the things that I have been attempting to say - I will revise them with this in mind.

There are [several C/C++ library candidates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_cryptography_libraries):

- Botan
- libgcrypt
- Crypto++
- libsodium / NaCl
- NSS

Of these, Botan was selected for several reasons:

- It has a BSD license
- It has a C FFI
- It offers a broad variety of functionality and algorithms, including post-quantum cryptography
- It has been [audited](https://botan.randombit.net/releases/audit_1.11.18.pdf) in the past

> - There are dead bindings targeting Botan 2 / GHC 8 that can be examined / revived

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are unmaintained Haskell bindings targeting Botan 2 / GHC 8 that can be examined / revived
```

- Significant implementation work has already been performed in order to validate the feasibility of Botan

The others were not selected for several reasons:

> - libgcrypt is C so it requires no FFI, but it has a GNU LGPL license, and provides less functionality than Botan

Reviewer: Surely the FFI is needed to call C as well?

Author: I will correct this - the intended meaning was that libgcrypt is C, so it does not need to worry about exposing a its own C-compatible function interface because it is already C. On the other hand, C++ libraries like Botan must expose a C-compatible interface for the Haskell FFI to connect with.

- Crypto++ has a Boost license (similar to BSD), but is C++ and has no C FFI, and provides less functionality than Botan

> - libsodium / NaCL does not provide the necessary functionality and there are several Haskell libsodium bindings already

Reviewer: What's missing from `libsodium` for realistic industry use cases? The existence of existing bindings seems to be a reason to just go use them, rather than make new ones - a few examples of relevant primitives missing from `libsodium` would be handy here.

Author: This has been covered in [another comment](https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/pull/57#issuecomment-1734396606)

- NSS has a copyleft license

Bindings to Botan would solve the significant problem of dealing with common cryptography by providing much of the necessary 'cryptographic kitchen sink' via bindings to a suitably performant, suitably licensed, open-source library. The Haskell community would not be required to maintain the Botan cryptography library, only bindings to it, and this can be accomplished readily with some effort which has already begun. Furthermore, the Botan library supports several post-quantum cryptography algorithms, which is highly desirable.

> It is important that the Haskell community has a strong cryptography library / presence that is not bent towards a particular agenda. It must be **free as in speech (licensing)** and **free as in beer (no mining)**, in order to allow the growth of advanced cryptographic techniques the way that Haskell has furthered the growth of functional programming techniques.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand this paragraph. What sorts of agendas would one worry about in a hash function? And are we really worried about rogue `libsodium` bindings mining cryptocurrencies here? Furthermore, it seems to me that the strongest argument for this proposal is that boring old everyday crypto is missing, not that we need to innovate with advanced crypto in our programs. Innovation is good, but keeping things relevant to standard practice is more important.

I'm not sure this paragraph contributes much to the argument, really.

Author: I can strike this, it is not technically relevant.

> NOTE: Cryptocurrency libraries and libraries not on Hackage are excluded from consideration.

Specific libraries worth noting are:

- Predecessors to `cryptonite` - all deprecated
    - [cryptohash](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptohash)
    - [cryptocipher](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptocipher)
    - [crypto-pubkey](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/crypto-pubkey)
    - [crypto-random](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/crypto-random)
- Cryptographic "kitchen sinks"
    - [cryptonite](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptonite)
    - [crypton](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptonite) - a fork of cryptonite
- Bindings to libsodium
    - [NaCl](https://github.com/serokell/haskell-crypto)
    - [saltine](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/saltine)
    - [sel](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/sel-0.0.1.0/candidate)
- Bindings to botan
    - [Z-Botan](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/Z-Botan) - part of Z-Haskell, GHC8
- Honorable mentions
    - [Crypto](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/Crypto) - a very old sink
    - [crypto-api](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/crypto-api) - cryptographic classes

>     - [cryptol](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptol) - a DSL for developing new cryptographic primitives

Reviewer: I don't think Cryptol is particularly relevant here - it's a language that is not Haskell, but is implemented in Haskell. It's used to specify crypto primitives, but executable Cryptol specs are not realistic parts of Haskell libraries intended fro broad use.

```suggestion
```

Author: I included it for completeness, but I can strike its mention here as it was definitely an outlier.

These prior efforts can be considered to be somewhat partially successful in presenting Haskell developers with access to cryptographic primitives, but present a significant development challenge and a high refactoring cost if dependences become deprecated, which happens often. Of these libraries, a considerable amount are deprecated or have been dead for many years, with `cryptonite`, `crypton`, and `saltine` being clear front-runners in terms of current usage and transitive dependencies (and `sel` being under active development). Of these four, one is a fork of another (`crypton` and `cryptonite`), and the other two are bindings to `libsodium` which does not sufficiently capture our need for low-level cryptographic primitives in general.

> None of these sufficiently express cryptography through the type-system and with type-classes. `crypton/ite` exposes a few highly- opinionated / specific classes for hashing, block and stream ciphers, but otherwise is focused on concrete implementations and functions. Both `crypton` and `cryptonite` rely on bindings to C implementations of unknown veracity; though the code is itself not suspect, the lack of provenance makes it ill-suited for recommendation in trusted environments, and maintenance of the C implementation poses burden of high technical skill. Libsodium bindings are more trustworthy, but the limited options severely hamper interop with other systems unless they too are using libsodium, making them ill-suited for recommendation for some use cases. `Z-Botan` has been apparently dead for several years, and even if revived has a has a sizeable dependency in the form of the `Z-Haskell` ecosystem.

Reviewer: While many of my comments here are nitpicks, this one is substantive.

The proposal treats type classes for cryptography as self-evidently good, but I don't know what the use case for them is. It would make the text much more convincing to have at least an example of where this would make programmers' lives better with respect to just importing the function they need.

Reviewer: Why are you proposing to create a new set of bindings in response to old ones being unmaintained? Why will this effort be maintained in the long run, unlike these others?

Author: The more abstract stuff such as typeclasses are being removed from this proposal for clarity. They've proven to be distracting, and I've narrowed the scope to just the `botan-bindings`, `botan-low`, and `botan` libraries. There are advantages to cryptography typeclasses, but their utility is more apparent when there are multiple backends (of which Botan would be the first). In particular, I believe that cryptographic typeclasses would find use in developing backend-agnostic cryptography test suites. Another issue is that hardcoding of algorithms is detrimental in the long run - it makes it difficult to patch vulnerabilities and switch to newer algorithms when attacks are discovered. A few examples of this is worldwide usage of MD5 in general, and specifically Github / SHA2 recently.

Regarding the old unmaintained bindings, `Z-Botan` is extremely tightly bound to the entire `Z-Haskell` ecosystem, and would require comprehensive and near-total rewrite in order to divest itself of `Z-Haskell` as a dependency. These new bindings draw significantly from `Z-Botan`, but present a much smaller maintenance and dependency surface.

> None of these sufficiently express cryptography through the type-system and with type-classes. `crypton/ite` exposes a few highly- opinionated / specific classes for hashing, block and stream ciphers, but otherwise is focused on concrete implementations and functions. Both `crypton` and `cryptonite` rely on bindings to C implementations of unknown veracity; though the code is itself not suspect, the lack of provenance makes it ill-suited for recommendation in trusted environments, and maintenance of the C implementation poses burden of high technical skill. Libsodium bindings are more trustworthy, but the limited options severely hamper interop with other systems unless they too are using libsodium, making them ill-suited for recommendation for some use cases. `Z-Botan` has been apparently dead for several years, and even if revived has a has a sizeable dependency in the form of the `Z-Haskell` ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
None of these sufficiently express cryptography through the type-system and with type-classes. `crypton/ite` exposes a few highly- opinionated / specific classes for hashing, block and stream ciphers, but otherwise is focused on concrete implementations and functions. Both `crypton` and `cryptonite` rely on bindings to C implementations that have not undergone the same vetting as commonly-used C libraries; though the code is itself not suspect, the lack of provenance makes it ill-suited for recommendation in trusted environments, and maintenance of the C implementation poses burden of high technical skill. Libsodium bindings are more trustworthy, but the limited options severely hamper interop with other systems unless they too are using libsodium, making them ill-suited for recommendation for some use cases. `Z-Botan` has been apparently dead for several years, and even if revived has a has a sizeable dependency in the form of the `Z-Haskell` ecosystem.
```

- Insufficient abstraction
- Maintenance of handwritten C
- Bindings to an insufficiently general library
- Burdensome dependencies
- Dead project
- Lack of post-quantum algorithms

However, there is also a lot to be learned from the ways these prior efforts *were* successful. This proposal will assess these existing efforts in an attempt to consolidate their learnings and functionality.

## An example of a successful ecosystem

The health of the Haskell server ecosystem may be used as an example of a successful community-driven niche, and we can aspire to bring that same quality and health to the Haskell cryptography ecosystem. There are many pertinent parallels in terms of managing performance, complexity, and safety that we can learn from:

- Low-level packages like `wai` supporting multiple backends
- Backends range from simple like `scotty` to complex like `servant`
- Frontends like `blaze-html` and `lucid`
- Libraries can take advantage of type system to provide good abstractions
- Flexible enough abstractions to explore the problem space with multiple solutions

> - Appropriate licensing

Reviewer: Licensing keeps coming up - it would also be good to be more explicit about your background assumptions, which are presumably that business users are likely to be unwilling to depend on copyleft code, and we want to provide value to them too.

Author: Agreed.

> `servant` (and the `wai` ecosystem in general) is a success story and an example of higher-order programming making something safer and easier, something that we can aspire to do with cryptography.

Reviewer: How is higher-order relevant here?

Author: I think I'll replace 'higher-order programming' with 'Haskell'

## Technical Content

This proposal is for the contruction of a suite of cryptography libraries, ranging from low-level bindings to specific algorithms, to higher-level abstractions and typeclasses.

This leg of the proposal focuses on bindings to the `botan` cryptography, in the form of the following libraries:

### botan-bindings

The `botan-bindings` library will contain raw bindings and is an almost direct, 1-1 translation of the C API into Haskell FFI calls. As such, it exposes and operates over C FFI types, requires buffer and pointer and pointer management, and returns error codes. This library only exposes FFI calls and constants, and is suitable for building your own abstraction over Botan.

### botan-low

> The `botan-low` library will contain low-level bindings which wrap the FFI calls into monadic IO actions. This library handles the translation between buffers and ByteStrings, and throws exceptions in the case of errors, but is otherwise a fairly faithful translation of the interface. Thus this library is suitable for use, but is not recommended for day-to-day programming due to statefulness and a lack of type safety.

Reviewer: How is it not type safe?

Author: It uses stringly-typed names (that follow a specific, undocumented parsable format) to pick between between algorithms with significantly different behavioral characteristics, the context / state is an opaque pointer, there is no way to tell what algorithm a context is for, and it relies on exceptional return codes when the user attempts to call a function with improper inputs. Quite frankly, I'd go as far as to say that `botan-low` is wildly unsafe unless you are excruciatingly careful, which is why `botan` is separate.

### botan

> The `botan` library will contain high-level bindings which hides the stateful IO and exposes appropriately idiomatic and pure interfaces. It will provide data types for algorithms, enumerations for constants, convenience methods for key and nonce generation, incremental processing of lazy bytestrings, and otherwise bring significant safety and ergonomics over `botan-low` and `botan-bindings`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `botan` library will contain high-level bindings which hide the stateful IO and expose appropriately idiomatic  pure interfaces. It will provide data types for algorithms, enumerations for constants, convenience methods for key and nonce generation, incremental processing of lazy bytestrings, and otherwise bring significant safety and ergonomics over `botan-low` and `botan-bindings`.
```

## Optional / Future Technical Content

More advanced concepts such as typeclasses may be delivered in a future leg focused on generalization, but some development occur earlier in order to provide a testable 'use case' for the stack of libraries. If the first leg is completed ahead of schedule, the remaining effort will go towards these libraries.

### crypto-schemes

The `crypto-schemes` library will contain a hierarchy of abstract type classes and data families for cryptography and scheme identifiers, allowing for a unified interface to multiple back-ends. It will also provide various utility functions including sized bit and byte vectors, block and padding functions.

### crypto-schemes-botan

The `crypto-schemes-botan` library will be an implementation of `crypto-schemes` using `botan`, implementing class instances for the specific algorithms that `botan` provides.

### botanium

> The `botanium` library will contain user-friendly bindings to specific algorithms, designed for ease of use much like `libsodium`, but using `botan` or `crypto-schemes-botan` as a backend.

Reviewer: I'm afraid that this name will be understood as a reference to "Chromium" rather than "Sodium", as the free version of an otherwise-proprietary program.

Author: The higher-level abstractions / libraries are being struck from this proposal to increase clarity / narrow scope / avoid confusion as they aren't the focus of this proposal.

### botanite

The `botanite` library will contain an as-close-as-possible reimplementation of `crypton/ite` using `botan` or `crypto-schemes-botan` as a back-end, and may be kept as a separate library or merged into `crypton` at a future time.

## Goals and Non-goals

The following are the immediate goals of this first leg:

- To publish the `botan`, `botan-low`, and `botan-bindings` libraries

> - To build proper documentation and tutorials covering the subject material

Reviewer: This is very important! Good!

> - To establish a community project presence focused on Haskell and cryptography

Reviewer: I don't understand what success looks like for this goal. Can it be made more specific/actionable?

Author: Its less important now, I think this was from notes before I joined the haskell cryptography group, and the devlog has already succeeded in doing that anyway. It can be struck from this proposal

Several work items (strictness, memory safety, C++ shims for missing FFI functionality) are difficult to estimate, and so time has been allocated for them in the estimate, but their delivery is considered optional, and may roll over into a future leg as necessary.

### Intermediate deliverables

The following are intermediate deliverables intended to keep the community apprised of any progress that is made, and any challenges that arise, and to seek community feedback:

- Frequent (2-3x weekly) activity update on devlog
- Weekly major update that includes github push
- Monthly report that summarizes what specific items have been worked on, what items will be worked on, and what challenges have arisen, if any.

### Deliverables

The following are the intended deliverables of this leg of the proposal:

- `botan-bindings`
- `botan-low`
- `botan`

Each library should be beta- or / production-ready, and submitted to hackage as a candidate or accepted package. 

Each library should have:

- Documentation
- Tutorials and examples
- Tracked issues
- Unit tests

> A project website will also be created.

Reviewer: Why? What value does it bring beyond that in the Github repo?

Author: The idea was that it is low-effort and aids in discoverability. Many successful Haskell libraries have at least a minor web presence, and it could be as simple as a page or site hosted on github.io linked to from the haskell cryptography group page. It would also be a place to link to funding / donations mechanisms and to acknowledge supporters and contributors.

This can be moved to optional deliverables / nice-to-haves, or elided completely.

> The official repo will be owned by the Haskell Cryptography Group, and another member of the Haskell Cryptography Group will be selected to hold backup keys and permissions to the website, server, and official repositories as needed, in order to give project members access and to reduce any conflicts about ownership or maintenance.

Reviewer: There should be a link to them, and they should be invited to share their thoughts on the proposal. Can you contact them?

Author: I'll add the link, and I posted on discourse with a mention of the cryptography group

## Budget

> The first leg of this proposal presents a minimum budget of $7000 USD per month, for one full-time engineer, for a duration of 3 months, for a total of $21,000 USD. This budget is based on cost-of-living and industry experience, and will cover housing, food, bills, taxes, and other life necessities for one engineer, as well as any project necessities such website and server hosting. This budget is roughly equivalent to $40 / hr or $84k / yr at full-time of 40 hrs / wk. Industry rates for an engineer of the necessary skill are on average considerably higher, and so we consider this budget to be reasonable. The exact legal contract / arrangement is left to the Haskell Foundation.

Reviewer: What about ongoing project management? Do we need to line up a volunteer to make sure the project is staying on track?

Author: Having a point of contact to regularly check in would be of assistance in keeping the project on track. I will add to the propsal something to this effect.

> The question of continued funding will be revisited for each future leg of this proposal, wherein the budget and direction of future work will be decided again for each leg.

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused by the structure of legs here. Does accepting this proposal mean recommending that the whole series should be funded, or that just the specific work in this document should be funded?

Perhaps the proposal can be for a single project that delivers value even if not followed up on, rather than as the first step in a long series of tasks?

Reviewer: And then of course there can be follow-up proposals for future development. Basically, we only have enough info to evaluate this phase, so it would be good to be explicit that this is what is being recommended or not.

Author: > I'm a bit confused by the structure of legs here. Does accepting this proposal mean recommending that the whole series should be funded, or that just the specific work in this document should be funded?

I wasn't sure on what approach the Haskell Foundation would find acceptable, or how long-term of a project it would be interested in funding. It is a considerable investment, and I am a relative newcomer to the community, and I felt it best to offer a short-term roadmap to build trust rather than require a leap of faith.

> Perhaps the proposal can be for a single project that delivers value even if not followed up on, rather than as the first step in a long series of tasks?

This is my intent (and why I have narrowed scope). I am interested in proposing a whole series, but what that later work looks will take more time to refine and would get in the way of accomplishing the immediate focus / goal of specifically developing the `botan` bindings. This proposal is specifically for the Botan libraries. If it is successful, then by the time this leg is finished, I will have a much better description of what the next leg would involve.
 
> And then of course there can be follow-up proposals for future development. Basically, we only have enough info to evaluate this phase, so it would be good to be explicit that this is what is being recommended or not.

This is accurate - I have outlined this phase sufficiently, but I will need more time to develop a proposal for future / advanced work.

## Stakeholders

Several parties stand to gain from the implementation of this proposal.

- Leon Dillinger (Myself)

As the intended engineer carrying out the work, I have already invested significant effort in this project in order to establish its viability, and will benefit from this proposal in the form of being the recipient of the funding.

- [Haskell Foundation](https://haskell.foundation/)

> As the intended source of funding, the Haskell Foundation would be invested in this proposal financially, and its effective success or failure would reflect respectively upon the Haskell Foundation.

Reviewer: The reason the HF wants to do this is not to look good, it's to take care of the practical concerns you discuss earlier.

Author: Acknowledged, that was definitely not the point that I was trying to get across. Moreso that one successful project encourages other future projects. I will try to rework this.

- [Haskell Cryptography Group ](https://github.com/haskell-cryptography)

> As the intended owner of the project, this project will be new maintenance burden on the Haskell Cryptography Group.

Reviewer: Do we think they have the resources to take care of this? If so, it would be good to say so here.

Author: I am a member of the cryptography group, so I am the intended recipient of this maintenance burden - I should definitely clarify this.

- Users of existing cryptography libraries such as `crypton`, `cryptonite`, `libsodium / saltine`.

As the intended target audience of this project, this proposal aims to directly benefit developers by providing high-quality cryptography libraries at several appropriate levels of abstraction, but will also place the burden of migration to these new libraries on developers.

> - Downstream users of Haskell software, developers with 

Reviewer: Looks like a sentence wasn't finished here

Author: Thanks, I'll find the end of it somewhere in the rough draft.

As the eventual user of the developed software, their safety and security will rest on the proper execution of this proposal. 

## Risks

There are a number of risks.

> - Cryptography is hard and each algorithm may have individual nuances or uncommon requirements. 

Reviewer: Why is this a risk? That's just part of using crypto effectively.

Author: These nuances often require consulting documentation specific to the algorithm (ie, looking up an RFC) which is often absent from the documentation of cryptographic libraries implementing them, and often require highly-specific knowledge to understand the implications. Most libraries only tell you what algorithms are available, and tell you nothing about the qualities of the algorithm itself.

For instance:

- SHA-512 is susceptible to a length-extension attack, but SHA-384 isn't
- SIV ciphers aren't online capable
- Stream ciphers don't have block sizes
- CBC-CTS requires at least one block of input to start
- CBC ciphers require padding, and so always have longer ciphertexts even when block-aligned *unless they are block-aligned and **dont** have padding*.
- Poly1305 is such an misuse- / error-prone beast that the best advice for Poly1305 is always to not use it unless you have to

These nuances tend to carry over into compound structures that use the primitives. I am working to add safety mechanisms to `botan` in this regard, but its a big risk in that there is a large surface for mistakes to happen, and each algorithm requires individual addressing in order to ensure safety and proper use.

> - Botan FFI is incompletely documented and has gaps (stream ciphers, X509 stores, a few broken functions) which need to be fixed with C++ shims

Reviewer: Are you contributing these upstream?

Author: If you are referring to submitting a PR back to Botan with improvements of some of the things that I've found in order to eventually replace the C++ shims, yes - they should be contributed upstream. In that case, `Botan` itself may be considered a stakeholder.

- Strictness, memory safety & scrubbing, C++ shims will take an unknown amount of time
- A thorough / safe implementation will require consulting the C++ source of the FFI
- Polynomial combinations of algorithms makes exhaustive testing complicated.

These risks are amortized in that while they are tedious and potentially time-consuming, they may be considered extended goals of high value, and there is still substantial value that can be delivered without them, and the completion of risk items may continue in a future proposal leg.

- Single point of failure

> This is a proposal for one full-time engineer; this constitutes a single point of failure. To combat this, the official github repo will be owned by the Haskell Cryptography Group, and another member of the Haskell Cryptography Group will be selected to hold backup keys and permissions to the website, server, and official repositories as needed. In the case of an emergency for which I am unreachable, this will allow for others to take over as necessary.

Reviewer: Shouldn't the HF staff also be able to help recover from sudden loss of maintainers?

Author: This is correct - I will add it.

## Success

This leg of the project will be considered a success if it results in the submission of a candidate or accepted package to hackage, with production-ready bindings, documentation, tutorials, and unit tests as appropriate for the following botan-related libraries:

- botan-bindings
- botan-low
- botan

The following Botan library features are considered optional to the success of this leg, due to requirement of C++ / FFI shims or additional research which will take an unknown amount of work, but effort will be made to include them if possible within the timeframe. 

- Extended X509 support
- Stream ciphers

> - Test vectors for algorithms, especially [CAVP / FIPS / NIST-approved](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-algorithm-validation-program)

Reviewer: This seems like something that could be extremely valuable in its own right. What if you create a general lib for testing crypto, and then use it in your test suite and also make it available for other tests?

Author: Yes - the value of test suites has been discussed and recognized elsewhere in this PR, and will be emphasized.

The following libraries are considered non-essential to the success of this leg, but may be worked on as they provide a valuable use case with which to test the lower libraries against, and may be subsumed into another at any time (eg, botanite could be merged into crypton).

- botanium
- botanite
- crypto-schemes

> - crypto-schemes-botan

Reviewer: I'm much less convinced of the case for funding these libraries - these sorts of wrappers seem to be something easier to build outside the project. Or am I missing something important?

Author: These libraries are [being elided from this proposal](https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/pull/57#issuecomment-1738225603) in the name of clarity / focus / avoiding confusion.

# Botan Cryptography Community Project Proposal

# Abstract

> This community project proposal is for full-time funding for the development of a suite of Haskell cryptography libraries and tooling suitable a wide range of uses including data integrity, privacy, security, and networking. This is necessary to relieve the burden [of correctly implementing cryptography] from Haskell developers seeking to provide privacy and security to their users. We propose the development of a community-owned set of cryptography libraries of increasing capability, starting with bindings to a compatible open-source cryptography library. This is expected to require a considerable effort over time, and will be broken up into individual proposals, each of which will be accompanied by its own  specific set of goals.

Reviewer 2: Was the text in square brackets supposed to be a link? The formatting seems a bit off.

Author: Oops that is a bit of my scratch note formatting that escaped containment. It means I was considering an alternate sentence fragment / rewording it.

However, if we accept this downside as a part of a trade-off, and explore the ways that functional programming is beneficial to cryptography, there is then also the potential for functional cryptography to be made *easier*.

The collective properties of referential transparency, type systems, and monadic interfaces provide a safer and more lawful context in which to write functions than the free-for-all that many imperative / OOP languages can offer, and so the functional machinery of Haskell is well-suited for adding important measures of safety and control to cryptography, helping to prevent or eliminate many issues and errors in ways that languages such as C cannot. I believe that there is room for significant improvement, given a directed effort to develop the space.

# Problem Statement

> The Haskell cryptography ecosystem lacks significant capability beyond basic primitives. This places a significant burden on developers to properly implement various security techniques, and it exposes end users to significant risk in the event of a lapse in security. There are commercial solutions, but there is no community-driven, community-owned solution, and one is unlikely to be developed without deliberate community effort (see Appendix A - Commercial Incentive Misalignment).

Reviewer 2: Which commercial solutions do you have in mind? It would be nice to link such prior art if any.

Author: I was mostly thinking of Cardano, but also that there are commercial cryptography libraries that could probably be paid to develop Haskell bindings for their proprietary code. An alternative wording might be "There are ways to solve this commercially".

Reviewer 2: My impression of Haskell cryptography in industry is that the majority of companies just use `cryptonite` / `crypton` or other preexisting packages. Is Cardano any different? Could they possibly chime in and share their experience? @michaelpj @angerman

Reviewer 3: Cardano is all open source, the library of ours that contains crypto bindings is Apache licensed. But it _is_ very geared towards our usage, e.g. it contains some bindings to functions that only exist in our fork of libsodium 🙈 So I don't think our stuff is a "commercial solution" in that it's not commercial and it's probably also not a solution to your problems!

I might have the history wrong, but I think we used to use cryptonite but now just write our own bindings to relevant C libraries. I don't know why we stopped using cryptonite, but probably some combination of worries about maintainership and it significantly increasing our audit surface.

The Haskell cryptography ecosystem is also brittle and outdated. It is the product of considerable flux / churn over the years as various libraries have been developed and then deprecated or abandoned in favor of newer ones. The resulting libraries have highly-concrete interfaces and are strongly influenced by their implementation, both violating the abstraction barrier and preserving the design across successive libraries - as if their backend were to be changed, it would likely require changing or breaking the interface in turn.

As a result, there are multiple cryptography libraries with similar interfaces, and it is not always clear which should be used preferentially. This promotes rot as downstream users unknownly rely on unmaintained libraries that slowly stop working.

> Furthermore, a number of important libraries in the ecosystem (eg, `cryptonite`) have recently been abandoned by their author. Their backend is written in C, which presents a long-term maintenance burden with a high knowledge and skill requirement. NaCl bindings such as `saltine` are a high-quality alternative, but solve only a limited set of problems.

Reviewer 2: Are there more examples of abandoned cryptography libraries? The statement sounds unjustifiedly negative.

Author: I am not trying to call him out, but I am referring to Vincent Hanquez, the developer and maintainer of `cryptonite` and many other libraries, who has recently [quit Haskell entirely](https://twitter.com/vincenthz/status/1704395906374889934). The `crypton` fork had already occurred prior to this, due to a lack of maintenance and refusing a request for transfer of ownership.

Reviewer 2: True, I just don't follow how the abandonment of Vincent's packages other than `cryptonite` is relevant to the proposal. 

There is no harm in being specific about objective facts. But vague statements of this sort can create wrong impression.

Author: I am unsure of how to bring it up properly without creating a strong impression. There is the original event earlier this year that lead to the forking of `crypton` and `cryptonite`, but also his recent archiving of all of his repositories, which the community has not had time to react to.

Worse, `cryptonite` [is not the only cryptography package of his](https://hackage.haskell.org/user/VincentHanquez). Most of those appear to be deprecated precursors to `cryptonite` that can be ignored, but there are several other cryptography-adjacent libraries such as `asn1-encoding` and `memory` which are not deprecated, which libraries such as `tls` and `crypton-x509` currently rely on as dependencies.

Do you have a suggestion on how to word this? This is my best attempt so far:

> Furthermore, a number of important libraries in the cryptography ecosystem (eg, `cryptonite`, `asn1-encoding`, and `memory`) have recently been archived by their author and will no longer be receiving updates.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me. 

In the grand scheme of things, packages come and go all the time, it's a proper operation. If they are important enough, someone will care enough to maintain a fork.

> The resulting brittleness has placed the long-term stability of important libraries such as `crypton`, `tls` and `x509` at risk of falling behind as compilers are upgraded, old standards are updated, and new standards are implemented. Additionally the instability creates an unattractive environment for developers, effectively driving them away to other ecosystems that can provide the necessary stability.

Reviewer 2: `crypton` or `cryptonite`? The former (and `tls`, and `x509-crypton`) seems doing well.

Author: `crypton` is a fork of `cryptonite`, and it has inherited the design and burden of the original, and there is a difference between maintenance and development. There are no current issue with maintenance, but the development of significant improvements such as the addition of new algorithms has been made more difficult without the original author. `tls` and `x509-crypton` have made the jump to `crypton`, but if cryptographic standards were to progress further (eg, begin requiring post-quantum algorithms), it is probable that maintenance would no longer be sufficient.

- NSS has a copyleft license

Bindings to Botan would solve the significant problem of dealing with common cryptography by providing much of the necessary 'cryptographic kitchen sink' via bindings to a suitably performant, suitably licensed, open-source library. The Haskell community would not be required to maintain the Botan cryptography library, only bindings to it, and this can be accomplished readily with some effort which has already begun. Furthermore, the Botan library supports several post-quantum cryptography algorithms, which is highly desirable.

Furthermore, bindings to a dedicated cryptography library may yield a performance benefit, as one would expect a popular C++ crypto library such as Botan to be highly performant. Testing in GHCi with `:set +s` for a requested example of `bcrypt` yielded the following results:

```
-- Botan
ghci> bcryptGenerateIO "Fee fi fo fum!" r 16
"$2a$16$j3Obv.HNT8zQ9OXFXEJeQeq3nT5WmUecPYDF0tc3grNsX9N0uDSCm\NUL"
(3.73 secs, 996,152 bytes)

-- cryptonite
ghci> hashPassword 16 ("Fee fi fo fum!" :: ByteString) :: IO ByteString
"$2b$16$nmHHDe/wnfSl85dIFtqjMuAHxqAmL.JQ6knp8e6kf.X1V9/LCZxUy"
(8.84 secs, 2,138,266,840 bytes)
```

> It was quick and dirty testing in GHCi so your mileage may vary, but the results indicate that bindings to Botan may be significantly faster and consumes less memory than `crypton/ite`, if other modules / functions are similarly performant. Further implentation, testing, and benchmarking will be necessary to confirm this.

Reviewer 2: TBH benchmarks in GHCi are meaningless. The proposal would benefit from benchmarking compiled code via `tasty-bench` or `criterion`.

Author: Good idea. I'll put together a proper benchmark of a few things (bcrypt, hashing).

# Prior Art and Related Efforts

We can group Haskell cryptography efforts into several categories, which are not necessarily distinct:

- Libraries for specific algorithms
- Cryptographic "kitchen sinks"
- Bindings to foreign libraries
- Efforts by [Thomas DuBuisson](https://hackage.haskell.org/user/ThomasDuBuisson)
- Efforts by [Vincent Hanquez](https://hackage.haskell.org/user/VincentHanquez)

The wiki lists [several libraries](https://wiki.haskell.org/Applications_and_libraries/Cryptography) and Hackage lists [many more](https://hackage.haskell.org/packages/#cat:Cryptography) according to the category.

> NOTE: Cryptocurrency libraries and libraries not on Hackage are excluded from consideration.

Specific libraries worth noting are:

- Predecessors to `cryptonite` - all deprecated

>     - [cryptohash](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptohash)

Reviewer 2: There is also a family of `cryptohash-*` packages, all kept on life support.

Author: Yes, I'm not quite sure what their exact relationship is to `cryptohash` (eg, do they predate it or the other way around) but they are both by the same author and presumably share a code base.

Author: I looked into it and it appears that those are stripped-down, algorithm-specific versions of `cryptohash` to reduce the footprint. I've added brief mention of this.

### Intermediate deliverables

The following are intermediate deliverables intended to keep the community apprised of any progress that is made, and any challenges that arise, and to seek community feedback:

- Frequent (2-3x weekly) activity update on devlog
- Weekly major update that includes github push
- Monthly report that summarizes what specific items have been worked on, what items will be worked on, and what challenges have arisen, if any.

### Deliverables

The following are the intended deliverables of this proposal:

- `botan-bindings`
- `botan-low`
- `botan`

Each library should be beta- or / production-ready, and submitted to hackage as a candidate or accepted package. 

Each library should have:

- Installation instructions for the Botan library
- Documentation
- Tutorials and examples
- Tracked issues
- Unit tests
- CI tests for Linux, MacOS, and Windows

> The official repo will be owned by the [Haskell Cryptography Group ](https://github.com/haskell-cryptography) and maintained by myself as a member of the group. Another member of the Haskell Cryptography Group, or a member of the Haskell Foundation, will be selected to hold backup keys and permissions to the website, server, and official repositories as needed, in order to give project members access and to reduce any conflicts about ownership or maintenance.

Reviewer 2: I cannot be sure and I appreciate that it's a delicate matter, but if I read your intention right, I think it would be better served by explicitly granting ownership to HF and maintainership to HCG.

Author: That might be more appropriate, and aligns with my intent.

- Cryptography and security are preventative measures and a cost center for most companies
- Companies for which cryptography / security are a product have a strong incentive to marshal users into a walled garden in the name of both security and profit
- Developing an ecosystem is a significant up-front investment, and so investors may expect ownership of the ecosystem in order to recoup their cost
- There is an incentive to wait for someone else to develop an open ecosystem, instead of expending resources yourself to do it

As such, commercial or for-profit approaches are incentivized to either invest in a private ecosystem, or invest in an established open ecosystem, but are perversely incentivized against building a new open ecosystem.

# Appendix B - Lack of ByteString `Bits` instance

Essentially, `Bits`` (and the fixed-width `FiniteBits``) is a class that combines two concepts:

    `Boolean / Heyting`` algebra, for which there is no concept of any 'internal bits' or structure and you are just operating on some object as a whole

>     Things that are contructed from / encoded into a set of 'internal bits' using some encoding, for which individual bits are indexable / addressible, and thus individually boolean-operable. There is also a link here to indexing / representable, but that is getting way out of scope.

Reviewer 2: Formatting seems off.

Notably, the documentation itself further states that "The `Bits` class defines bitwise operations over integral types.". Technically this means that only things that are integer numbers should be `Bits` and `FiniteBits`, but Godel numbering rears its ugly head, and that just adds the question of whether `Bits`'s boolean operations are intended to apply to an object itself or its encoding, and as a result `Bits` and `FiniteBits` are restricted to objects for which the boolean operations are isomorphic to boolean operations over its encoding.

> Given this understanding, `ByteString` does not have a canonical `Bits` instance because it has no canonical integer representation - a given bytestring could represent many such integers, whether it be big endian or little endian, it could have a sign bit, or be two's complement. Its bits might not be contiguous or even ordered. It could easily satisfy a `Boolean` instance, but the issue of indexing individual bits and integral type requirement interferes with a full instance of `Bits`.

Reviewer 2: In my CLC hat I'm hugely sceptical about introducing `class Boolean` as a superclass of `Bits`. I mean, I absolutely agree with the motivation, but we just don't have a good migration story for changing type class hierarchy. 

One solution would be to resurrect default superclasses proposal. 

I recall that `bitvec` (which is morally a `ByteString`) has an audacity to define `instance Bits`. Is it if any help? Could we just wrap `ByteString` into a newtype and define whatever is missing?

Author: The proposal for `class Boolean` spawns from the same work as but is not a part of this proposal. David asked for clarification / a link to the topic, so I added an addendum just in case but it can be ignored entirely.

Re: `bitvec` I already have a lightweight class for sized byte vectors in `crypto-schemes`, but it is mostly for type safety and `bitvec` may be faster. I'll definitely be keeping that in mind.

1) Cryptography involves a lot of stateful low-level bitwise manipulation and non-determinism, something Haskell is not known for being good at. Classes like `Bits` and `FiniteBits` classes are critical for cryptography, but are terribly awkward to implement (like `Num`). Notably, `ByteString` does not implement them for nuanced reasons (see Appendix B - Lack of ByteString `Bits` instance).

2) Cryptography has a high knowledge and technical skill floor. Cryptography is more than just the usual primitives of ciphers, public and private keys, hashes, and MACs, and the scope of knowledge can grow quickly as primitives are combined into more advanced algorithms.

3) There is a persistent notion that functional languages are too slow for cryptography, despite it being based on historical reasons that have been mostly since addressed. Well-written modern Haskell approaches C in terms of speed, and has a much higher ergonomic-use and type-safety factor, but the public image has not caught up yet, and so the ecosystem has not received the investment and attention necessary to attract the attention of skilled engineers for developing either pure implementations or foreign bindings.

> 4) A fair number of cryptographic projects in recent years has been specifically towards *cryptocurrencies*, rather than *cryptography in general*, and their results are at large fairly useless if they cannot be used outside of their ecosystems.

Reviewer 4: Maybe this could be rephrased slightly.

I.e. I think _some_ of the cryptocurrency work has probably usefully affected some libraries (maybe?); it's just the scope of a lot of crypto work in cryptocurrencies can be idiosyncratic and not generally useful in scenario A, B, C ...

This could go hand-in-hand with a change to this section (above):

> NaCl bindings such as `saltine` are a high-quality alternative, but solve only a limited set of problems.

to list the problems that saltine focuses on (I actually don't know!). For example, personally in my daily life I work with JWTs and Cookies; both of which require cryptography. I recently learned (from @Kleidukos ) that the clientsession library depends on cryptonite (likewise [jose](https://flora.pm/packages/%40hackage/jose/0.10/dependencies). So for me, I only need _these_ libraries to improve, not the lower-level ones.

I.e. it would help me to understand a bit more what is the list of things that I can't do with saltine but can do with botan.

Note that the memory use increase in Hash.Botan.longtext is due to the rough state of initial bindings, as the bindings are not yet leak-free. Despite this, it is still approximately twice as fast.

# Prior Art and Related Efforts

We can group Haskell cryptography efforts into several categories, which are not necessarily distinct:

- Libraries for specific algorithms
- Cryptographic "kitchen sinks"
- Bindings to foreign libraries
- Efforts by [Thomas DuBuisson](https://hackage.haskell.org/user/ThomasDuBuisson)
- Efforts by [Vincent Hanquez](https://hackage.haskell.org/user/VincentHanquez)

The wiki lists [several libraries](https://wiki.haskell.org/Applications_and_libraries/Cryptography) and Hackage lists [many more](https://hackage.haskell.org/packages/#cat:Cryptography) according to the category.

> NOTE: Cryptocurrency libraries and libraries not on Hackage are excluded from consideration.

Specific libraries worth noting are:

- Predecessors to `cryptonite` - all deprecated
    - [cryptohash](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptohash)

>         - `cryptohash-md5`, `-sha1`, `-sha256`, `-sha512` are reduced-footprint forks

Reviewer 2: To be precise: these are not deprecated.

    - [cryptocipher](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptocipher)
    - [crypto-pubkey](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/crypto-pubkey)
    - [crypto-random](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/crypto-random)
- Cryptographic "kitchen sinks"
    - [cryptonite](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptonite)

>     - [crypton](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptonite) - a fork of cryptonite

Reviewer 5: link points to `cryptonite`

Following that, there is also `Z-Botan`, which has been apparently unmaintained for several years. Reviving it was considered, but would require a comprehensive and near-total rewrite in order to divest itself of `Z-Haskell` as a dependency. New bindings could instead draw significantly from `Z-Botan`, while presenting a much smaller maintenance and dependency surface.

> Furthermore, none of these libraries contain implementations of post-quantum cryptography schemes; although existing quantum computers are of insufficient capability to break commonly used algorithms such as Ed25519, this will not remain true forever, and it would be best to have quantum-resistant implementations ready for adoption long before such attacked become practical.

Reviewer 4: > ...  before such attacked become ...

attacked -> attacks.

It's a nice point, and in this context it's often worth pointing out that post-quantum cryptography is necessary now because _it is sufficient to capture the encrypted traffic now!_ and then decode it later once there are powerful-enough quantum computers; i.e. data now is not safe against future quantum computers.

## Stakeholders

### Positive stakeholders

Several parties stand to gain from the implementation of this proposal.

- Leon Dillinger (Myself)

As the intended engineer and member of the Haskell Cryptography Group carrying out the work, I have already invested significant effort in this project in order to establish its viability, and will benefit from this proposal in the form of being the recipient of the funding.

- [Haskell Foundation](https://haskell.foundation/)

As the intended source of funding, the Haskell Foundation would be invested in seeing that its funding is spent effectively.

- [Haskell Cryptography Group ](https://github.com/haskell-cryptography)

> As the intended owner of the project, this project will be new maintenance burden on the Haskell Cryptography Group.

Reviewer 2: This probably needs rephrasing, given that HF is now supposed to become an owner.

Reviewer 6: "This project will be new maintenance burden on the Haskell Cryptography Group, which is projected to be the maintainer designated by the Haskell Foundation"
